# Adaptive Piano Pedals
Boston University Senior Design Project 2024-2025 Team 20

	The goal of the Adaptive Piano Pedal Device is to create a device that controls the pedals without the use of the lower body, enabling the users who cannot use their legs or feet to operate the pedals with no restrictions. With our device, the pedals of the piano become accessible to all with minimal interference to playing the keys. 
	A piano typically consists of three pedals: the sustain (or damper) pedal, the soft (or una corda pedal), and the sostenuto pedal. The rightmost pedal is the sustain pedal and this lifts all the dampers off the strings of the piano. This allows for the strings to vibrate even after the keys are released, creating a fuller tone. The soft pedal is generally located on the left, and this slightly shifts the hammers to a side. When a key is pressed, the hammer hits fewer strings and creates a more subdued tone. The middle pedal is usually the sostenuto pedal which is a selective sustain pedal, meaning it sustains only the notes played before the pedal was pressed. The dampers of the played keys are locked in place until the pedal is released. The sustain pedal is most frequently used, followed by the damper pedal, and the sostenuto pedal is the least used as its mastery is an advanced skill. 
	Adaptive Piano Pedals aims to create a device that is the most intuitive for users and requires the least amount of training to use effectively. Because the sustain pedal is used the most, we chose to have its depression mapped to a finger-pressure sensor on the user’s dominant index finger. When they play the keys with a normal force, no actuation occurs. When the user plays a key and then presses a secondary, stronger pressure on their finger, the sustain pedal is depressed for an amount of time controlled by how hard they pressed. The harder the user presses down after playing the key, the longer the sustain rings out. 
The sostenuto pedal is triggered with another finger-pressure sensor which can be attached to the user’s dominant thumb, or any finger that best fits their playing style. The sostenuto pedal is toggled on and off with the finger sensor. When the user presses with sufficient force on that finger the sostenuto pedal is depressed, when the user presses again it is released.  
	The soft pedal is triggered using a shoulder-mounted accelerometer that detects shrugs. The sensor is mounted on an adjustable strap which can be worn on the user’s preferred shoulder. When the user lifts their shoulder, the actuator is toggled on. The soft pedal is depressed and remains engaged until the shoulder is lowered again. Once the user relaxes their shoulder, the pedal is released.
	The actuators for the pedals are 3 linear actuators suspended above the pedals on an adjustable stand. The stand can be used to adjust the placement of the actuators on a 2-d plane, to be compatible with different sizes and shapes of piano pedals. Adjusting the pedal locations is made easy for users, requiring no external tools, only the ability to loosen wing nuts. It does not need to be attached to the piano in any way, keeping it mobile and usable on many different pianos. 
	The sensors and actuators are connected via a controller unit which sits on top of the piano in reach of the player. The controller allows the users to adjust key parameters, such as maximum and minimum depression of the actuators, sensor input sensitivity, and pedal-specific parameters to avoid damaging the piano. The sensors plug in to the controller using music-industry standard ⅛” cables and the linear actuators connect via ¼” music cable. The controller features simple, user-friendly knobs and buttons, and RGB LEDs clearly indicate which parameter is being adjusted
